# pph2_and_rank.py

Submits a list of genes with SNPs to [PolyPhen2][] and orders them by
a score measuring the overall deleteriousness of the mutations, 
normalized for protein length.

## License

Written by Ted Pak for the [Roth Laboratory][].

Released under an [MIT license][]; please see MIT-LICENSE.txt.

BeautifulSoup, an included library, is released under a new BSD-style license.  
Please see its source code or [website][] for more details.

## Requirements

Any modern *nix with Python >=2.6 installed.  This includes Mac OS X.

## Usage

    $ ./pph2_and_rank.py [-h|--help] [--hg19] [--humdiv] [-q|--quiet] [-s|--sid SID]
           [-o|--output OUTPUT] MUT_LIST_1 [MUT_LIST_2 ...]
    
### Options

* `-h` or `--help` displays a simple usage message.

* `--hg19` tells PolyPhen2 to use build 19 of the human genome assembly instead 
  of build 18.

* `--humdiv` tells PolyPhen2 to use the HumDiv PolyPhen2 classifier model instead
  of HumVar.

* `-o OUTPUT` or `--output OUTPUT` will cause output to be written to the
  file named by OUTPUT instead of sending it to standard output.

* `-q` or `--quiet` will suppress the status updates normally sent to
  standard error.
  
* `-s SID` or `--sid SID` allows you to specify a previous GGI session ID
  that the script will re-attach to. In this case, all the `MUT_LIST_$N` inputs
  are ignored. Use this when a previous script has already submitted
  information to PolyPhen2 but the script was prematurely terminated. The SID
  is displayed in the status messages that this script prints to standard error
  once it has been received from PolyPhen's GGI status page.
  
### Input

`MUT_LIST_1`, `MUT_LIST_2` and so on must be files where each line follows
the form `acc_id mut_1 mut_2 mut_3 ...` and each `mut_$n` is the
concatenation of the canonical AA, the position, and mutated AA. For
example:

    Q92889 I706T E875G
    Q6ZSZ5 L763F
    Q32M45 Q390P E463Q A549T E570K P686H

If any one of the `MUT_LIST_$N` arguments is set to `-` (hyphen), the list
is read from standard input until EOF is encountered. Therefore, you can
also do:

    $ cat mutations_1.txt mutations_2.txt | ./pph2_and_rank.py -

### Output

The output is a tab-delimited table of genes sorted by their score,
where the score is produced by summing the PolyPhen2 scores, dividing
by the AA sequence length of the gene product, and multiplying by [the
completely arbitrary constant] 1000. It is sent to standard output, with 
progress messages sent to standard error.

To save the output from the script, either redirect standard output:

    $ ./pph2_and_rank.py mutations.txt > output.txt

or use the `-o` or `--output` option:

    $ ./pph2_and_rank.py -o output.txt mutations.txt

[Roth Laboratory]: http://llama.mshri.on.ca/
[PolyPhen2]: http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/
[MIT license]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIT_license
[website]: http://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup/
